See that? I once spent over 12 hours on
the set of the AMC television show Turn
pushing a wheelbarrow for 20 ft through
the mud for take after take just for the
sake of being that 1 second blur in the
background of a single shot. I'm not
saying [music] this to complain. In many
ways it's literally the job of the
background talent or extras, as they're
often called, to be present but to go
unnoticed. Sorry. To form a kind of
texture for the scene. And while extras
play an incredibly crucial role in
bringing film and TV to life by
populating [music] the area around the
main characters to make sure the world
of the film looks and [music] feels
realistic.
Most of the time that's basically all
they're used for. A blur of nameless
bodies that are almost a kind of set
design adding context and realism to the
story without drawing the audience's
attention away from the story itself.
But you can also use them like this.
>> [music]
>> Or like this.
Or this.
As with any aspect of filmmaking, there
are some movies and filmmakers that defy
the norm and use extras in fascinating,
brilliant, or artful ways. Here's a
subtle example of what I mean. Let's say
you have a classic scene from a romance
where two potential lovers are walking
through a park. You could just fill
their surroundings with the usual crowd
of suspects.
But what if you wanted to subtly
highlight the emotional distance between
these two leads in this scene? The
romantic gap that they're afraid to
close. That's exactly what Celine Song
does in this scene from Past Lives where
every single background extra in the
scene is romantically paired off as a
couple. It inverts the way these scenes
usually play out as if all the extras
are the ones in the romance movie and
the two leads are the characters just
going about their lives.
>> [music]
>> It's not the kind of thing that's going
to jump out at most viewers, but it's a
fantastic little flourish that
reinforces the story's subtext.
Book about metals. A bad performance
from an extra can potentially create a
distraction. They might spike the lens
by looking directly into the camera like
this woman does in Michael Mann's Heat.
Save the phony tears. Or they might do
something distractingly unrealistic like
this kid in North by Northwest does by
plugging his ears before a gunshot even
happens.
Or they might make the easiest error
like I did on another day I was an extra
on Turn by slipping into dramatic
overacting.
Despite all the ways an extra can flub a
scene, it's rare to find examples that
actually make it into a final film or
television show and are noticeable
enough to actually matter. These things
happen, but it's the job of the
directors, the assistant directors who
work directly with the extras, and the
editors to notice the flubs and work
around them. So, when I think of
background talent that isn't quite
great, it's usually not because of a bad
performance from an extra, but instead
the absence of extras where it feels
like they should be present. [music]
In some movies like Heat, you find the
world surrounding the main characters
teeming with people. Streets, cafes,
bars, and offices all have other people
going about their lives alongside
whatever the main characters are doing.
And then sometimes you watch a movie and
you notice it feels a little
>> [music]
>> artificial in a way that's hard to put a
finger on. There can be many things that
cause this, but occasionally it's
because the locations in the film feel
just a little too empty. This is the
kind of thing that's not immediately
noticeable in any given scene, but over
the course of a film can really add up
to create a world that feels uncanny.
[music] For an example of this, look at
this scene from The Rip compared to a
similar kind of scene from Heat.
Of course, I'm not saying quantity of
extras is automatically better. Not all
stories require a lot of background
talent. [music] Some take place in more
isolated environments, or the sense of
emptiness created by a lack of extras
could be a deliberate storytelling
choice. But, it's also a way you can
kind of cut corners in filmmaking that
isn't immediately noticeable, but where
you'll ultimately feel the absence.
Extras can kind of be like the seasoning
that tie a scene together, really adding
a sense of life and visual interest and
motion to a film. A lack of extras isn't
always a creative oversight, [music]
though. There are a lot of practical
reasons why a film might have less of
them. They're an added expense. They add
complexity and difficulty to blocking
and shooting scenes. And more recently,
COVID played a big part in reducing the
number of extras on set. And I think
some of the habits that were developed
during that time have lingered. But, I
think there are a lot of cases where the
added cost and effort of having plenty
of extras [music] is worth it. And there
are lots of directors working who make
an effort to use extras in interesting
ways. [music]
In the current era of [music]
filmmaking, Scorsese might be the king
of this. In movies like The Irishman,
The Wolf of [music] Wall Street, and
Killers of the Flower Moon, he
consistently uses large groups of extras
to [music] an amazing effect, bringing
these period worlds alive.
Extras play a special [music] role in
period films, essentially acting as
models for the costumes, which are often
a big [music] part of what defines the
era.
I really love what Scorsese and his
costume designer do in The Irishman,
often creating these beautiful color
palettes for each crowd, treating the
extras as a canvas on which the costume
designer can paint.
Extras can also help build out the world
of a film in science fiction. Movies
like Blade Runner rely heavily on the
extras and their costumes to help build
the world, but maybe my favorite example
of this is the dystopian apocalypse
picture Children of Men. [music]
Alfonso Cuarón uses wide-angle lenses
with deep focus to give us a wide vivid
view of the world that surrounds the
lead character. [music]
And this world is jam-packed with
interesting characters actually [music]
doing stuff.
What the background talent is doing in
this film is crucial [music] to defining
the nature of the world and what life is
like for people there. These extras
aren't just pantomiming conversations or
walking to unknown destinations. They
all seem to have something they're
trying to accomplish or need. [music]
And even if we don't understand exactly
what they're doing or why, the sense of
desperation that builds up throughout
[music] the film is palpable, and much
of that is created by this incredible
background ensemble.
Ploribus, the new show from Vince
Gilligan, is another science fiction
story where the extras play a critical
role. Here, almost everyone on Earth has
become part of a giant hive mind, and a
lot of how this is depicted is through
how the people [music] who fill the
world walk and move.
Sometimes having a ton of extras in your
film is just necessary for basic
realism. For example, if you're telling
a story about war, you might need a huge
army.
One way you could accomplish this is by
doing what David Lean did [music] for
Lawrence of Arabia, by actually
employing a real army.
Some of the most noticeably impressive
uses of extras are large [music] crowds
like this.
The 1982 film Gandhi currently holds the
record for [music] most extras in a
scene, clocking in at over 300,000
people for Gandhi's [music] funeral.
It seems unlikely a crowd this big will
ever be amassed for [music] a film
again. These days it's It's too easy to
extend a crowd using VFX. [music]
But what do you do if you're someone
like Christopher Nolan who's dedicated
to using as many practical effects
[music] as possible?
In that case, you're stuck with more
old-school, low-fi methods.
In Dunkirk, he already had 6,000 extras
on [music] his beach, but he needed to
boost the size of his army. So, way in
the back, he attached a bunch of
cardboard cutouts [music] to a fence.
Using background talent to create
realism isn't just a numbers game,
though. Often, how extras are placed and
moved is just as important.
If you watch classic studio films,
you'll see scenes that have plenty of
extras, but having the extras obscure
the view of the camera for an extended
period of time would have seemed
ridiculous. Yet, this is exactly what
Robert Altman does in The Player,
deliberately planting a whole tableful
of cyclists in distractingly colorful
riding gear in this restaurant, and then
having them get up and block the view of
the camera for an extended period of
time mid-scene, both in the name of
realism and as a kind of [music] visual
gag. You can find less glaringly obvious
versions of this move in many other
[music] movies. Filmmakers who do this
are using extras to deliberately create
a less-than-ideal shooting environment,
and it's exactly that lack of a perfect
[music]
view of the subject that lends the shot
a sense of realism. It's as if we're
seeing the camera struggling [music] to
capture something that's really
happening instead of a perfectly
choreographed fiction.
Another important part of realism in
background [music] talent, though, is
making sure they look the part. For
period films, casting people with
haircuts that fit the period is
important, but getting a diverse and
realistic set [music] of extras can take
a lot of extra casting effort. One way
directors find extras with the right
look is by deliberately casting
non-professional actors. In Terrence
Malick's Days of Heaven, for example,
they needed people who both looked like
farm workers and who knew how to act
like farm workers. So, he just went
ahead and hired a bunch of farm workers
for the film.
But, another more risky approach to
getting ultra-realistic background
talent [music] to fill your scene is to
use people who aren't extras at all.
This is what Sean [music] Baker did for
parts of The Florida Project, shooting
on the streets as his leads acted in the
midst of real people, and having
producers go in and speak to people
afterwards in order [music] to secure
permission and the necessary releases to
use the footage. Don't take this as
legal advice, but in some places it
[music] is legal to film people on
public streets without their permission,
and some filmmakers take advantage of
this by just filming scenes on [music]
public streets so that they don't have
to fill streets with extras. Hey,
I'm walking here.
This approach has a lot [music] of
challenges though, because you don't
want those people to notice you're
filming and look into the camera. The
trick is to keep a very low profile or
to hide the camera somewhere. [music]
Godard did this in Breathless by hiding
his cameraman in a little cart. Jafar
Panahi does this in It Was Just an
Accident by hiding a camera in [music] a
car, not just so that people in the
background don't notice, but also to
avoid being seen and caught by the
Iranian government after they banned him
from making movies.
Sean Baker and director So-Ching shot
Left Handed Girl in a fully operational
night market in Taipei, shooting on an
iPhone to be less noticeable.
It works amazingly well. The environment
of the film feels incredibly authentic
because it is, and only occasionally do
you catch one of the people in the
market noticing that someone is filming.
But, what if your story requires your
very recognizable lead actor to run in
his underwear through one of the most
crowded places on Earth? This is exactly
what Alejandro Iñárritu needed [music]
for Birdman, but closing down Times
Square and paying to fill it up with
paid actors would have been way too
expensive for the film's budget. [music]
So, they decided to have Michael Keaton
actually run through a busy Times
Square. Here the reaction from real
people to a famous actor in his
underwear running through Times Square
isn't a problem because in the story,
that's what's happening. A famous actor
is running through Times Square in his
underwear, so it makes [music] sense for
people in the scene to be reacting. But
you still have to protect your crew and
you want to keep [music] people from
looking at the camera. So they placed a
few paid extras strategically on [music]
the street for crowd control and hired a
drumline to create a distraction
and then just shot the scene.
Ultimately though for me, the most
interesting uses of extras are not the
most realistic ones. Celine Song's park
full of couples perfectly paired off in
idealistic love isn't realistic, but it
helps tell the story. Some directors
push this kind of thing much further,
turning the use and choreography of
extras into its own art form.
One of the directors who does this
you're probably already familiar with is
Wes Anderson.
I like his use of extras the most in
[music] The French Dispatch where the
background talent is carefully posed in
these frozen tableaus.
When the extras do move in this movie,
they move with a kind of clock-like
[music] precision. But Wes Anderson
didn't invent this. He's just following
in a tradition of filmmakers who have
[music] perfected the art of staging
extras.
One of the most notable of these
directors [music] is Akira Kurosawa who
would carefully choreograph the movement
of his extras within a scene [music] to
create a sense of rhythm and composition
in motion. For example, look at how this
crowd of journalists creates a perfect
separation [music]
to balance the composition where this
character is standing in the foreground.
Extras in his films will often move in a
flow from [music] one perfectly balanced
composition to another or they might
move their heads together [music] in
carefully timed synchronicity.
Kurosawa was the master of this, but you
can see extras used similarly for
composition and rhythm in a lot of
Spielberg's [music] work. Notice the
role extras play in this scene from Jaws
to create a kind of motion and activity
[music] in the background or the way
they're used in this one. It's rare to
see a scene shot like this today,
[music]
but if there's a director who has pushed
the limits of choreographed chaos
further than any other, it might have to
be Jacques Tati.
In his masterpiece Playtime, the way
[music] the people that populate his
immaculately constructed post-modern
city are dressed and moved create this
kind of expressionistic [music]
representation of modern reality.
In some ways it starts to break down
[music] our idea of what an extra even
is.
For example, in this scene from La La
Land,
>> [music]
>> would we call these people extras?
Probably not usually because [music]
they're performing a choreographed dance
and they're the subject of the scene,
but the dance is being performed by
people [music] who would typically
occupy the space in the story that is
being occupied by extras in [music] a
film. That's much closer to the way
extras are being used in Playtime.
They're not performing a dance, but
they're also not just moving around in a
naturalistic [music] way in the
background while the subject is in the
foreground. They are the subject. Look
at these extras who are just standing in
the back doing [music] nothing but
slowly rotating.
Tati constructs scene after scene that
might look [music] normal at first
glance, but which becomes hilariously
absurd the closer you examine it. A gag
might be built just out [music] of the
contrasting costumes and postures of two
extras that are sitting next to each
other. Through this Tati constructs a
kind [music] of maximalist chaos. In
many shots there's no clear subject or
lead character. The subject is instead
[music] the chaos. Your eyes might land
on this woman who's exhausted from
dancing
>> [music]
>> and then jump to the waiter tripping and
the patrons reacting before drifting
over to whatever's happening here. The
point of these shots [music] isn't so
much to construct intelligible action as
much as to capture an overwhelming
feeling and heighten its absurdity for
comedic effect.
Swedish director Roy Andersson also uses
extras expressionistically but at the
opposite end of the emotional spectrum.
In Songs from the Second Floor, it's as
if every character, extras included, has
had the life sucked out of them.
They are motionless and dejected.
In the background, occasionally
wandering groups of business people pass
by whipping each other.
>> [cheering]
>> For one of the most interesting uses of
extras I've ever seen put to film, watch
this moment.
You don't need incredible acting to be a
good extra. Most of the time, you're
just performing mundane tasks that we
all do in everyday life. Standing in a
crowd, walking [music] down a street,
having conversations at a restaurant.
But it does take a little bit of skill.
You have to perform [music] these things
as naturalistically as possible for long
periods of time while silently
pantomiming. [music] For the sake of
getting clean sound, you have to pretend
to party without actually yelling or
partying. You have to pretend to talk
without actually talking.
>> [music]
>> And despite the allure of Hollywood,
it's relatively unglamorous work. My
time on Turn involved standing in an
uncomfortable period costume in the cold
for hours waiting to be told what to do.
But hanging out on a film set can be
fun, and getting to see the inner
workings of the machine can be very cool
if you're interested in the craft of
filmmaking. [music] Being an extra is
probably the easiest way the average
person has a chance to do just that. I
just wouldn't expect it to
>> [music]
>> be a stepping stone to your people like
Brad Pitt have been extras before they
eventually became lead talent, [music]
getting access to a speaking role
because you were an extra is extremely
rare. It's entirely possible to make a
great movie with little to no background
talent. But for many films, the extras
[music] are one of the most important
elements in bringing the world to life
in a realistic way. And I appreciate the
role the people who show up for these
parts play in the art of filmmaking, as
well as the filmmakers who go the extra
mile to make sure [music] their
background talent is elevating the story
in unique and interesting ways. So much
of the art of filmmaking [music] is
about these kinds of little details, the
12 hours of work for a single blur.
Like extras, I'm fueled by coffee, but
getting coffee shop quality coffee at
home can be a [music] total hassle. You
have to keep your beans fresh, get your
grind right, time your pour over
correctly, etc., [music] etc. So usually
at home I settle for mediocre flavor, or
I lock in on that one cup I know I can
get [music] right. It's a safe bet, but
lacks variety. Cometeer, my sponsor for
this video, makes it so much easier to
explore the world of [music] coffee by
providing an entirely new way to make
it. They precision brew it at 10 times
the strength, and then flash freeze it
into these little pucks to lock in peak
flavor. These capsules [music] let you
make a perfect cup of coffee in seconds
with no machine. Want hot coffee? Just
pop out the frozen puck and add hot
water. It sounds hyperbolic, but I'm not
kidding when I say that every coffee
I've tried so far from Cometeer hits
that sweet spot of [music]
perfectly balanced and smooth while
still maintaining the bold unique flavor
[music] you want from higher-end roasts
like this. Sourced from award-winning
roasters like Intelligentsia out of
Chicago [music] or the incredible
Counter Culture and Black and White both
out of my home state, Cometeer has an
amazing selection to choose from. My
favorite so far is the [music] Decaf
Black Cat Espresso from Intelligentsia.
I love being able to have great coffee
later in the day and this is some of the
best flavor I've found in any decaf.
Being able to have that in seconds at
home is awesome. If you prefer an iced
latte over hot, you can just start with
milk and ice and then drizzle in a
thawed capsule and stir. [music]
Or go with an iced coffee by doing the
same thing with water. For me, Cometeer
has added a lot of variety to my coffee
[music] routine. It's perfect for the
days where I'm locked in editing or
writing a video. I can have an afternoon
pick-me-up without having to take the
time to break out of the flow or needing
[music] to compromise on the flavor or
quality of the coffee I'm drinking. It's
fun to be able to try a much greater
variety of roasts while still [music]
knowing I'm getting the ideal flavor
every time. These little capsules are
fully recyclable, they have no
microplastics, and they're super
portable. I recently [music] took a
couple with me on a backpacking trip for
easy perfect coffee mid-hike. Camera
departments, grips, give it a try. If
you haven't tried Cometeer yet, you can
get $30 off of your first order by going
to cometeer.com/thomasflight
[music] or by clicking the link in my
description. Thanks again to Cometeer
for sponsoring this video.